Compare databases
=====================

Since three separate databases (PhagesDB, PhameratorDB, and GenBank) store actinobacteriophage genomics data, it is inevitable that data inconsistencies between them will arise unless a mechanism to synchronize all three is established. Although the import script utilizes many QC checks for this purpose, it only ensures consistency for the specific genomes being imported and it only cross-checks databases as directed by the import ticket. In order to ensure comprehensive consistency, the compare_databases.py script has been created, which requires two arguments [Table 14].

This object-oriented script enables the database administrator to compare PhameratorDB data to either PhagesDB data or GenBank data, or to compare data between all three databases (it does not compare PhagesDB data to GenBank data unless it also compares PhameratorDB data). All phage data, or subsets of phage data, can be compared. For instance, the administrator can compare genomes depending on their annotation status (draft, final, or unknown) or their authorship (hatfull, non-hatfull).

Using the PhameratorDB instance indicated by the second script argument, the script retrieves data stored in the Phage and Gene tables. PhagesDB data for all sequenced phages are retrieved from: http://phagesdb.org/api/sequenced_phages/. All GenBank records are retrieved using accession numbers stored in the Accession field of the Phage table in PhameratorDB. The script matches all data in PhameratorDB and PhagesDB using the PhageID field in PhameratorDB and the phage name in PhagesDB, and it matches all data in PhameratorDB and GenBank using the Accession in PhameratorDB. After retrieving and matching data from all databases, the script compares genome data (e.g. phage name, host strain, genome sequence, etc.) and gene data (e.g. locus tags, coordinates, descriptions, etc.), and generates several results files (Table 15). Additionally, the script can output genomes retrieved from all three databases for future reference and analysis if selected by the user.
